The visual village

Before the age of the smartphone, aspiring photographers had to learn how to use high-tech cameras and photographic techniques. Not everyone had cameras, and it took skill and a good eye to capture and create a great photograph. Today, with the huge range of camera apps on our smartphones, we are all amateur photographers. And pretty good ones, too: The quality of smartphone images now nearly equals that of digital cameras.
The new ease of photography has given us a tremendous appetite for capturing the magical and the ordinary. We are obsessed with documenting everyday moments, whether it’s a shot of our breakfast, our cat – or our cat’s breakfast. And rather than collect pictures in scrapbooks, we share, like, and comment on them with friends and strangers around the globe.
Even photojournalists are experimenting with cell phones because their near invisibility makes it easier to capture unguarded media. They can now act as their own publishers – reaching huge audiences via social media sites such as Instagram. A photograph taken in New York can get a response from someone in Lagos within a second of being uploaded.
In the past, magazines published unforgettable photos of important people and global events that captured our imaginations. These photos had the power to change public opinion – even the course of history. But if there are fewer memorable images today, it’s not because there are fewer good images: It’s because there are so many. No one image gets to be special for long.
Cameras are everywhere – a situation that is transforming the way we experience dramatic events. When there are major political events or natural disasters, it is ordinary citizens with cell phones – not photojournalists – who often provide the first news images. Quality still matters, but it’s less important than what’s instantly shared.
As people everywhere embrace photography and the media make use of citizen journalist, professional standards appear to be shifting. In the past, most people trusted photojournalists to accurately represent reality. Today, however, digital images can be altered in ways the naked eye might never notice. Any image can be altered to create an “improved” picture of reality. The average viewer is left with no way to assess the accuracy of an image except through trust in a news organization or photographer.
The question of the accuracy of images gets even trickier when photojournalists start experimenting with camera apps – like Flickr or Instagram – which encourage the use of filters. Images can be colored, brightened, faded, and scratched to make photographs more artistic, or to give them an antique look. Photojournalists using camera apps to cover wars and conflicts have created powerful images – but also controversy. Critics worry that antique-looking photographs romanticize war, while distancing us from those who fight in them.
Yet, photography has always been more subjective than we assume. Each picture is a result of a series of decisions – where to stand, what lens to use, and what to leave in or out of the frame. Does altering photographs with camera app filters make them less true?
There’s something powerful and exciting about the experiment that the digital age has forced upon us. These new tools make it easier to tell our own stories, and they give others the power to do the same. Many members of the media get stuck on the same stories, focusing on elections, governments, wars, and disasters. In the process, they miss out on the less dramatic images of daily life that can be just as revealing and relevant.
The increase in the number of photographs and photographers might even be good for democracy itself. Hundreds of millions of potential citizen journalists make the world smaller and help keep leaders honest. People can now show what they are up against, making it increasingly difficult for governments to hide their actions. If everyone has a camera, Big Brother isn’t the only one watching.
Who knows? Our obsession with documentation and constantly being connected could lead to a radical change in our way of being. Perhaps we are witnessing the development of a universal visual language. It’s one that could change the way we relate to each other and the world. Of course, as with any language, there will be those who produce poetry and those who make shopping lists.
It’s not clear whether this flowering of image-making will lead to a public that better appreciates and understands images. Or will it simply numb us to the profound effects a well-made image can have? Regardless, the change is irreversible. Let’s hope the millions of new photographs made today help us see what we all have in common, rather than what sets us apart.


Living light
The ability of some species to create light, known as bioluminescence, is both magical and commonplace. Magical, because of its glimmering beauty. Commonplace, because many life forms can do it. On land the most familiar examples are fireflies, flashing to attract mates on a warm summer night. But there are other luminous land organisms, including glow-worms, millipedes, and some ninety species of fungus. Even some birds, such as the Atlantic puffin, have beaks that glow in the dark.
But the real biological light show takes place in the sea. Here, an astonishing number of beings can make light. Some, such as ostracods, are like ocean fireflies, using flashes of light to attract mate. There are also glowing bacteria, and light-making fish, squid, and jellyfish. Indeed, of all the groups of organisms known to make light, more than four-fifths live in the ocean.
As a place to live, the ocean has a couple of peculiarities. Firstly, there is almost nowhere to hide, so being invisible is very important. Secondly, as you descend, sunlight disappears. At first, red light is absorbed. Then the yellow and green parts of the spectrum disappear, leaving just the blue. At two-hundred meters below the surface, the ocean becomes a kind of perpetual twilight, and at six-hundred meters the blue fades out too. In fact, most of the ocean is as black as the night sky. These factors make light uniquely useful as a weapon or a veil.
Hiding with light
In the ocean’s upper layers, where light penetrates, creatures need to blend in to survive. Any life form that stands out is in danger of being spotted by predators, especially those swimming below, looking up. Many life forms solve this problem by avoiding the light zone during the day. Others, such as jellyfish and swimming snails, are transparent, ghostlike creatures, almost impossible to see.
Other sea species use light to survive in the upper layers, but how? Some, such as certain shrimp and squid, illuminate their bellies to match the light coming from above. This allows them to become invisible to predators below. Their light can be turned on and off at will, some even have a dimmer switch. For example, certain types of shrimp can alter how much light they give off, depending on the brightness of the water around them. If a cloud passes overhead and briefly blocks the light, the shrimp will dim itself accordingly.
But if the aim is to remain invisible, why do some creatures light up when they are touched, or when the water nearby is disturbed? A couple of reasons. First, a sudden burst of light may startle a predator, giving the prey a chance to escape. Some kinds of deep-sea squid, for example, give a big squirt of light before darting off into the gloom.
Second, there is the principle of ‘the enemy of my enemy is my friend.’ Giving off light can help summon the predator of your predator. Known as the burglar alarm effect, this is especially useful for tiny life forms, such as dinoflagellates, that cannot swim fast. For such small beings, water is too viscous to allow a quick getaway, it would be like trying to swim through syrup. Instead, when threatened by a shrimp, for example, these organisms light up. The flashes attract larger fish that are better able to spot, and eat, the shrimp. The chief defense for these tiny organisms is therefore not fight or flight, but light.

Genetic engineering (GE) of crops and animals  through the manipulation of DNA  is producing a revolution in food production.


The potential to improve the quality and nutritional value of the food (that)  we eat  seems unlimited.


Such potential benefits notwithstanding, critics  fear that genetically engineered products – so-called biotech foods –  are being rushed to market before their effects  are fully understood.





On the other hand, the techniques of genetic engineering are new and different.

Conventional breeders always used plants or animals  that were related, or genetically similar.

In so doing, they transferred tens of thousands of genes.

In contrast, today’s genetic engineers can transfer just a few genes at a time  between species  that are distantly related, or not related at all.
 There are surprising example: Rat genes have been inserted into lettuce plants  to make a plant  that produces vitamin C.
 Moth genes have been inserted into apple trees  to add disease resistance.
The purpose of conventional and modern techniques is the same – to insert genes from an organism  that carries a desired trait into one that does not.
 Several dozen biotech food crops are currently on the market, among them varieties of corn, soybeans, and cotton.
 Most of these crops ate engineered  to help farmers deal with common farming problems such as weeds, insects, and disease.

Are biotech foods  safe for humans?


D As far as we know. So far, problems have been few.

 In fact,  according to a 2016 report from the National Academy of Sciences in the United States,

"No differences  have been found  that indicate a higher risk  to human health and safety from these GE foods than from their non-GE counterparts.

" Some GE foods might even be safer than non-GE foods. Corn damaged by insects often  contains high levels of fumonisins-toxins (that grow in the wounds of the damaged corn.)

Lab tests  have linked  fumonisins with cancer in animals. Studies  show  that most corn modified for insect resistance  has   lower levels of fumonisins than conventional corn damaged by insects.



However, biotech foods have had problems in the past. One such problem occurred in the mid-1990s, when soybeans were modified using genes from a nut.

The modified soybeans contained a protein that causes reactions in humans who are allergic to nuts.
While this protein was discovered before any damage was done, critics fear that other harmful proteins created through genetic modification may slip by unnoticed.
Moving genes across dramatically different species-such as rats and lettuce-also makes critics nervous.
 They fear something could go wrong either in the function of the inserted gene or in the function of the host DNA, with the possibility of unexpected health effects.

Most scientists  agree  that the main safety issues of GE crops  involve  not people but the environment.
Allison Snow, a plant ecologist at Ohio State University, worries  that GE crops are being developed too quickly and released  before  they’ ve been  adequately tested.


On the other hand, advocates of GE crops argue that some genetically modified plants may actually be good for the land, by offering an environmentally friendly alternative to pesticides, which can pollute water and harm animals.
Far fewer pesticides need to be applied to cotton plants that have been genetically modified to produce their own natural pesticides.


While applied chemical pesticides kill nearly all the insects in a field, biotech crops with natural pesticides only harm insects that actually try to eat those crops.

Can biotech foods help feed the world?


“Eight hundred million people (on this planet) are malnourished,” says Channapatna Prakash,


a native of India and a scientist (at Tuskegee University’s Center) (for Plant Biotechnology
Research) (in the U.S.A),
“and the number continues to grow.”
Prakash and many other scientists argue that genetic modification can help address the urgent problems of food shortage and hunger (by increasing crop quantities).

Crops can be engineered to grow in area with harsh, dry climates or in soils not usually suitable for farming.


According to the World Health Organization, an estimated 250million children in the world suffer from vitaminA deficiency

Between 250,000 and 500,000 go blind every year as a result,

with half of those children dying within a year of losing their sight.

“Golden rice”-a biotech variety named for its yellow colors- is thought by some to be a potential solution to the suffering and illness caused by vitamin A deficiency


Other experts, however,  claim that the biotechnology industry  has exaggerated  the benefits of golden rice.

“Golden rice alone won’t greatly diminish vitamin A deficiency,”  says  Professor Marion Nestle of New York University.


“Beta-carotene, which is already widely available in fruit and vegetables,  isn’t converted  to vitamin A  when people are malnourished.

Golden rice  does not contain  much beta-carotene,  and whether  it will improve  vitamin A levels remains to be seen.”

Whether biotech foods  will deliver on their promise of eliminating world hunger and improving the lives of all remains to be seen.

Their potential  is enormous, yet they  carry risks.

If science  proceeds with caution, testing new products thoroughly and using sound judgment, the world  may avoid the dangers of genetic modification while enjoying its benefits.
